---
layout: post title: "Why I'm starting this blog"
date: 2019-09-30 22:32:13 -0500
---
It's been a little over six years since Edward Snowden first revealed,
in June 2013, the extent of widespread mass surveillance of innocent
civilians by governments and corporations. I followed the news stories
back then with the kind of fascination and repulsion one might have in
watching a horror movie, as I'm deeply bothered by the idea that
governments and corporations should surveil and track ordinary people
who are not suspected of any crime or wrongdoing. Yet other than
watching the documentary
[Citizenfour](https://citizenfourfilm.com/about), switching my default
search engine to DuckDuckGo, and beefing up my passwords, the Snowden
revelations didn't have much of an impact on my life or my actions. In
fact, my exposure to online tracking and surveillance only deepened with
my use of a new Google phone and its default Android operating system,
along with its oh-so-easy integration with Google Photos. (I previously
used an Android phone with an alternative operating system called
Cyanogen Mod, per a friend's advice. However, I'd run into some
difficulties with updates as the phone and operating system aged.
Therefore, with my next phone I opted to switch to the stock Android
operating system – whose tracking and reporting of my digital activities
was mostly unknown to me, given that I didn't take the time to do an
exhaustive sweep of its settings.)

Fast-forward to two months ago in early August 2019. As I was reviewing
my photos on Google Photos I noticed something interesting and creepy on
the Google Photos website. Google Photos uses facial recognition to
identify the people in your photos. I don't know whether the service 
necessarily knows _who_ the person is, but it recognizes the same face
across different photos that you've taken. This allows for the
convenience of searching your photos to find all the images of, say,
Aunt Sally. I never used the feature nor paid it much attention.
However, this time as I looked at the photos I'd taken at a party, I saw
that Google Photos had identified children at the party and had indexed
them against other images of those same children that _I had not taken_.
Prior to that, I'd naively assumed that Google Photos would only perform
facial recognition within my set of photos, but not _across_ other
people's photos, or across Google's whole universe of photos.

After I'd been creeped out by that discovery I looked and noticed that I
could turn off the facial recognition feature, which I did. So, assuming
that I trust Google, Google Photos would no longer analyze any faces in
my images. But why should I have that kind of trust? Snowden had already
shown that Google and other major tech companies were willing to provide
troves of data on innocent people to the US government. Facebook's
repeated headlines about its lack of concern for user privacy showed its
inability or unwillingness to protect users' privacy. So, although I
turned off the facial recognition setting, I realized that the
geographic metadata embedded in most photos, combined with massive-scale
facial recognition, could provide detailed records of where people have
been and who they were with at the time. The point isn't that I have
something to hide or that I know that Google will do something nefarious
with the knowledge of who attended this party. Rather, it's a question
of centralized control and the abuses of power that come from granting
near-omniscience to an elite minority. Snowden has described how
intelligence analysts could examine all the intimate online details of
their current or former lovers. At the extreme, China uses draconian
surveillance to create an open-walled prison for the minority Uighurs,
and ICE uses multiple forms of surveillance to discover undocumented
immigrants. Data, even innocuous small bits of data, can be used against
us by large-scale actors, such as governments and large corporations.

In a September 13, 2019
[interview with The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2019/sep/13/edward-snowden-interview-whistleblowing-russia-ai-permanent-record)
about his recently-published memoir called
_[Permanent Record](https://www.worldcat.org/title/permanent-record/oclc/1114558657)_
– which I'm excited to read as soon as I can pick it up at the library –
Ewen MacAskill mentioned that Snowden is "concerned the US and other
governments, aided by the big internet companies, are moving towards
creating a permanent record of everyone on earth, recording the whole of
their daily lives." After reading that sentence, I became motivated to
find out how we might avoid that kind of dystopian future. The
centralized nature of this "permanent record" enables an elite minority
to hold a vastly asymmetrical information advantage, and to exert
various forms of control over the rest of us.

So that's why I'm starting this blog. The blog will be a journey in
which I intend to share my experiences and what I learn in a way that
will hopefully be useful to others. As I'll be the first to admit, I'm
far from an expert on privacy, security, surveillance, or tracking. I've
got a few skills that might prove useful, including some Python
programming experience, and perhaps those will prove relevant here. And
if I envision this blog as being wildly successful in its
[mission](/mission) then I would love to collaborate with others on this
journey as it unfolds.
